# Fundamentals: states & transitions

At the heart of SCXML, we have the `<state>` and `<transition>` nodes. It wouldn’t be a statechart without these nodes.

`<transition>` nodes live inside `<state>` nodes and describe what it takes to move (‘transition’) to a different state. Every state has an `id` attribute that defines its name. Every transition has an `event` attribute and a `target` attribute that define *which event* triggers a move to *which state*, respectively.

## Example: a lamp

Let’s say we have a [touch lamp][lamp]. Whenever you touch it, it turns on if it was off and off if it was on.

So we have two states: ‘on’ and ‘off’. We also have one event: ‘touch’. We can organize this into a statechart like so:

```xml
<scxml>
  <state id="on">
    <transition event="touch" target="off"/>
  </state>
  <state id="off">
    <transition event="touch" target="on"/>
  </state>
</scxml>
```

Easy. This happens to be the simplest *functioning* statechart you can define.

## Example: two buttons, one light

Now say we have one of those antique light switches that operates a light with two buttons: one for ‘off’, and one for ‘on’. Pressing ‘off’ while the light is already off does nothing, and the same for the converse.

For the buttons we have two events, ‘switch-off’ and ‘switch-on’ respectively. For the light we have two states, ‘on’ and ‘off’. That looks like this:

```xml
<scxml>
  <state id="on">
    <transition event="switch-off" target="off"/>
  </state>
  <state id="off">
    <transition event="switch-on" target="on"/>
  </state>
</scxml>
```

From a design standpoint, this configuration takes a little more effort on the user’s part because the user has to decide what she intends to do, which determines which button to press. But perhaps this light consumes a lot of energy to turn on, so accidentally turning the light off is intentionally designed to require more thought. 

## Example: indoor lights with multiple switches

Let’s step up our game. We have a light on the ceiling which can be switched on or off from multiple locations using on/off light switches that are meant to physically represent the light’s state.

For each switch we have two events, ‘switch-off’ and ‘switch-on’. For the light we have two states, ‘on’ and ‘off’.

The way the light is wired, the position of the switches is, confusingly, irrelevant. The light’s state is toggled regardless of the position of either switch. If both switches fire the same events, we have:

```xml
<scxml>
  <state id="on">
    <transition event="switch-on" target="off"/>
    <transition event="switch-off" target="off"/>
  </state>
  <state id="off">
    <transition event="switch-on" target="on"/>
    <transition event="switch-off" target="on"/>
  </state>
</scxml>
```

You can immediately see the design problem here. Why use a switch which has two physical positions that are meant to map to the light’s current state when those positions are totally irrelevant? Why not just use a single power button?

This is one of the great side-effects of using statecharts: interaction design smells become provocatively clear.

[lamp]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DIt4bR677Us