# Fundamentals: doing with SCXML

Until now, we’ve written SCXML that doesn’t actually do anything. In the real world, when you transition to a new state UI elements need to be hidden or shown, or the appliance needs to sing a song, or the simulated character needs to use a different sprite. This chapter is about doing those things in SCXML.

There are a few nodes that make this happen, and we’ll introduce more later.

## `<datamodel>` & `<data>`, and `<assign>` & `<script>`

The `<datamodel>` node with its children the `<data>` nodes are used to define the namespaces the statechart can use to store information and functions. The statechart can then use `<assign>` nodes to give those namespaces values and `<script>` nodes to do something with those values.

In this example we’ll focus only on using `<assign>` and `<script>` nodes inside `<transition>` nodes, though later we’ll describe other ways they can be used.

Here’s a statechart that defines how the user can drag and drop an object:

```xml
<scxml>

  <datamodel>
    <data id="position" expr="null"/>
    <data id="element"/>
  </datamodel>
  
  <state id="idle">
    <transition event="mousedown" target="dragging">
      <assign location="position" expr="{x: _event.data.x, y: _event.data.y}"/>
      <assign location="element" expr="_event.data.el"/>
    </transition>
  </state>
  
  <state id="dragging">
    <transition event="mouseup" target="idle"/>
    <transition event="mousemove" target="dragging">
      <assign location="position" expr="{x: _event.data.x, y: _event.data.y}"/>
      <script>
        element.style.left = position.x + 'px';
        element.style.top = position.y + 'px';
      </script>
    </transition>
  </state>
  
</scxml>
```

It’s important to mention that any scripting in SCXML is ECMAScript (a.k.a. JavaScript).

`<assign>` uses two attributes, `location` and `expr`, which define *in which name* to store *what*, respectively. All `expr` attributes have to be expressions in ECMAScript, as if you were writing the right side of `position = …`. Notice here the `expr` attribute is used to define the initial value of the `"position"` `<data>` node as well as the values of both names in the `<assign>` nodes.

The SCXML interpreter makes one more namespace available to us, `_event`. When an event is fired on the interpreter, you can also pass a payload as `data` (which is accessed through `_event.data`), so in this case we expect `mousedown` and `mousemove` to come with a payload that has two properties, `x` and `y`, and we expect `mousedown` to also include `el`.