# Fundamentals: compound states

You might have noticed in the introduction our example included `<state>` nodes nested inside of other `<state>` nodes. A `<state>` node that has child states is known as a ‘compound state’.

Compound states are immensely useful. They’re a fantastic means of specifying that a group of states are themselves a state out of which a transition is possible. As in the vampire example: it doesn’t matter if the character is intact, in smithereens, or even in torpor; if the character is burned then the character dies.

The tricky bit is this: if the character were reconstituted from the ashes, what state would he be in? Intact? Torpor? If we were to add `<transition event="reconstituted" target="alive"/>` inside the `dead` state, it’s not clear.

There are two ways around this problem: always specify non-compound states (‘simple’ states) as transition targets, or specify an `initial` state for compound states. If you want your project to scale and you don’t have a specific reason not to point to an initial state, we think you should do the latter.

## `initial` or `<initial>`

The SCXML standard is extremely consistent everywhere but here. Such is the way of a W3C standard, but that’s part of W3C’s strange beauty. You can specify the first sub-state to go to in a compound state in **one of two** ways: an `initial` attribute on the compound state, or an `<initial>` node with a single `<transition target="…">` child.

Here are two statecharts for a microwave that use compound states to describe how the microwave behaves when it’s plugged in:

```xml
<scxml>

  <state id="unplugged">
    <transition event="plug-in" target="plugged-in"/>
  </state>

  <state id="plugged-in">
    <initial>
      <transition target="idle"/>
    </initial>
    <state id="idle">
      <transition event="start" target="cooking"/>
    </state>
    <state id="cooking">
      <transition event="stop" target="idle"/>
    </state>
    <transition event="unplug" target="unplugged"/>
  </state>
  
</scxml>
```


```xml
<scxml>

  <state id="unplugged">
    <transition event="plug-in" target="plugged-in"/>
  </state>

  <state id="plugged-in" initial="idle">
    <state id="idle">
      <transition event="start" target="cooking"/>
    </state>
    <state id="cooking">
      <transition event="stop" target="idle"/>
    </state>
    <transition event="unplug" target="unplugged"/>
  </state>
  
</scxml>
```

Naturally you wouldn’t want a microwave that’s lost power to just keep cooking the moment it’s plugged in again, so we’ve specified `"idle"` as the state to go to once it’s plugged in.

The `initial` attribute occupies less space and is arguably more straightforward, especially since you’re not actually allowed to do anything else with the `<transition>` inside `<initial>`, but as long as you only use one of these two syntaxes you can decide for yourself which to use.

Using `initial` or `<initial>`, you can specify compound interactions that have a default starting point. Later, we’ll introduce a few other ways to jump to a state inside a compound state too, but now you have the tools you need to create a huge range of state machines.