# Intermediate topics: the parallel state

Sometimes several stateful processes need to happen simultaneously. There are at least two important approaches to consider:

1. Make two separate state machines that run concurrently.
1. Use parallel states in a single state machine.

There are different reasons to choose either technique, and both have their own benefits and obstacles. Should the parallel processes be able to communicate? Are these processes truly independent in all cases? Should there just be multiple instances of the same state machine?

If the processes might need to communicate at some point, if there might be useful states outside of the parallel processes, and/or if the parallel processes aren’t just clones, it would be fruitful to consider using the parallel state so the same state machine governs those processes.

Parallel states are interesting for a few reasons. They’re effectively states, with a target-able `id`, but they can’t have `initial` states or attributes because, when entered, the interpreter then steps into **every** child state of the parallel state, effectively starting multiple slightly independent state machines.

Let’s consider a scenario where the `<parallel>` node is invaluable: a bifurcated UI.

## Navigation &amp; content

Lots of apps have a navigation component, but if the navigation is not monolithic and the content region of the viewport has its own states independent of navigation region’s, then it becomes a smell to create a `<state>` for each possible combination.

Instead, we can use `<parallel>`. Let’s create a news app with a content component that animates between views (thus preventing scrolling) and a nav that can expand to show a larger menu or search results. First, we’ll consider each component’s states on their own.

### Navigation

The navigation will have a collapsed and an expanded view, since all of our top-level (L1) links will have sub-links. The nav expands when any of the following happen: the user reaches the end of the page, the user swipes down at the top of the page, or the user navigates to an L1. The nav collapses when any of the following happen: the user scrolls the nav out of view, or the user clicks the same L1 they're on.

```xml
<scxml initial="nav-closed">

  <datamodel>
    <data id="current-l1"/>
  </datamodel>

  <state id="nav-closed">
    <transition event="click-l1" target="nav-open"/>
    <transition event="scroll-end" target="nav-open"/>
    <transition event="top-swipe" target="nav-open"/>
  </state>

  <state id="nav-open">
    <transition event="click-l1" cond="_event.data != current-l1" target="nav-closed"/>
    <transition event="menu-off-canvas" target="nav-open"/>
  </state>

</scxml>
```

### Content

The content region of the canvas will either freely scroll, or it will stop listening to scroll events and crossfade between pages. The transition here is not dictated entirely by interaction – if the app detects the user intends to navigate, a transition to the animation state is triggered, and only once that animation is complete does the app resume responding to scroll events.

```xml
<scxml initial="animating">

  <state id="idle">
    <transition event="navigate" target="animating"/>
  </state>

  <state id="animating">
    <transition event="done-antimating" target="idle"/>
  </state>

</scxml>
```

### Bringing it together

Let’s add one more detail – before the nav or the content are ready, the app needs to make an HTTP request, so there’s a (hopefully) brief loading state.

Combining all three of those components, we have:

```xml
<scxml initial="loading">

  <datamodel>
    <data id="current-l1"/>
  </datamodel>

  <state id="loading">
    <transition event="loaded" target="ready"/>
  </state>

  <parallel id="ready">

    <state id="content" initial="animating">

      <state id="content-idle">
        <transition event="navigate" target="content-animating"/>
      </state>

      <state id="content-animating">
        <transition event="done-antimating" target="content-idle"/>
      </state>

    </state>

    <state id="nav" initial="nav-closed">

      <state id="nav-closed">
        <transition event="click-l1" target="nav-open"/>
        <transition event="scroll-end" target="nav-open"/>
        <transition event="top-swipe" target="nav-open"/>
      </state>

      <state id="nav-open">
        <transition event="click-l1" cond="_event.data != current-l1" target="nav-closed"/>
        <transition event="menu-off-canvas" target="nav-open"/>
      </state>

    </state>

  </parallel>

</scxml>
```

Once the interpreter hears the `loaded` event, it transitions to the parallel state, which has as children `<state>` nodes that represent the two separate stateful components of our app. Once there, when the app fires events at the interpreter, both of the children of the parallel state can respond.